---
title: "NFL Data Analysis"
date: "2021-12-24T12:00:00.000Z"
description: "In this study, we used nonparametric methods to evaluate NFL kicks and throws by stadium. The motivation for this study was a previous study on NFL kicks and passes based on weather and stadium location, where the assumption had been that altitude changes the throw and kick distances of footballs."
author: "kim3-sudo"
slug: "posts/2021/12/24/nfl-data-analysis"

---
The flight of an object through the air is a concept thoroughly studied in fluid mechanics, and this is no different in football, where the idea that a kick might go further in a different stadium with thinner air is not foreign. However, previous research on this topic indicated that there was no strong evidence to support the hypothesis that stadium had a statistically significant impact on distance; this research used parametric methods and was limited in its power. It also did not take into consideration the change in play style over the course of the dataset, ten years. To remedy these deficiencies, this research ran the Kruskal-Wallis procedure for general differences in distributions, Dunn’s test and the Dwass, Steel, Critchlow-Fligner multiple comparisons procedures for differences identified using Kruskal-Wallis. I also ran the Mann-Kendall procedure to identify significant differences in multiple comparisons, then evaluate the linear rate of change using confidence intervals of kick and pass distance using Sen’s slope procedure, while patching holes in the data using the multivariate imputation by chained equations procedure.

The motivation for this study was a previous study on NFL kicks and passes based on weather and stadium location, where the assumption had been that altitude changes the throw and kick distances of footballs. In that study, we found that there was no statistical difference between stadiums that backed up the argument that air density has an effect on the distance a football could be thrown. However, we identified that the methods that we used were inappropriate for the shape and normality of the data.

This study expands on that previous research by demonstrating using nonparametric methods that while differences do exist, they do not exist in a meaningful way to substantiate the claim that kicks fly further when air is less dense. Rather, these differences exist because the teams that play at these stadiums the most are throwing or kicking the ball deeper. This is especially evidenced by the multiple comparisons, which demonstrated that while Ford Field in Detroit, Michigan performed significantly differently, so did the Detroit Lions (whose home stadium is Ford Field) when compared to many other teams.

To determine whether yardage had changed appreciably in the ten years of data, I also constructed a time series based on Kendall’s time series procedure. In this analysis, which included the time series, decomposition and smoothing of that time series, and a hypothesis test on whether a trend exists in that time series, it was demonstrated that there was no identifiable trend in throwing and kicking yardage throughout the ten years shown, aside from noise and differences due to random chance, positively or negatively.

The scripts and analyses used are available at GitHub in the following GitHub repository: [https://github.com/kim3-sudo/nfl_nonpar](https://github.com/kim3-sudo/nfl_nonpar). The final report will be made available (if it isn’t already) on the Kenyon Sports Analytics Society webpage.
